Add Python to Intro_Sorted_Sets Module (#4862)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: content/3_Silver/Intro_Sorted_Sets.mdx

</Warning>

</JavaSection>
<PySection>

In Python, we can use `iter()` to obtain the iterator object of any iterable.
This returns the first element, and using `next()` on the iterator gives you the
next one. Below, a dictionary is used instead of a set because dictionaries keep
order.

```py

> nums = {1: None, 7: None, 0: None, 2: None, 4: None}

Reviewer: i mean why not just have a set if you're gonna make all the keys none

Author: Lmao, I wanted to use an "ordered set" so that it shows correct iteration of it's order (1, 7, 0, 2, 4). But if that doesn't really matter that much I can just use a set lol.

Reviewer: yeah just use a set

iterator = iter(nums)

> print(iterator)  # <set_iterator object at 0x14765f3eb6c0>

Reviewer: is this needed lol

Author: I mean, for loops pretty much do the same thing in most cases. But in some cases, eg. getting any/first element of a set is easier.

```py
a = {4, 2, 3, 1}

print(next(iter(a))) # 1

for i in a:
    print(i) # 1
    break
```

From my research, it's also useful for OOP, but I haven't really experienced that myself.
Python has more useful iterators batched in the `itertools` library (which itself uses `iter()` a lot in it's functions).

Anyhow, for loops actually call on iter() and next(), so if you need more control in your iterations, it's useful.
Usually just for loops and while loops suffice though. If needed I can go over more useful iteration tools in the `itertools` library.

Reviewer: yeah sure, but in cp this knowledge doesn't come into play

Author: Itertools is very useful for cp, whereas iter() is just the fundamentals of Python iterators. I'll prob put more focus on itertools then.

</Warning>

</JavaSection>
<PySection>

In Python, we can use `iter()` to obtain the iterator object of any iterable.
Using `next()` on the iterator lets you iterate through the iterable.

Iterating through a `set`:

```py
nums = {1, "three", 0, (1, 3, 5), 4}
iterator = iter(nums)

print(next(iterator))  # 0
print(next(iterator))  # 1
print(next(iterator))  # 4
print(next(iterator))  # three
print(next(iterator))  # (1, 3, 5)

# Note:
# The numbers appear sorted when iterating due to the hashing implementation

> # Sets are not ordered, so do not expect ordered/sorted behavior

Reviewer: oops uh can you revert back to `dict` i have no clue sets weren't ordered
very sorry

Author: Ohh ok got it

```

> Iterating through a `SortedSet`:

Reviewer 2: i don't think you need this because you go through it later--it's not like they can use this on usaco anyways 👀

Reviewer 2: Oops, I think Kevin already mentioned this.

Author: Got it!

<PySection>

In Python, we can use `iter()` to obtain the iterator object of any iterable.
Using `next()` on the iterator lets you iterate through the iterable.

```py
nums = {1, "three", 0, (1, 3, 5), 4}
iterator = iter(nums)

print(next(iterator))  # 0
print(next(iterator))  # 1
print(next(iterator))  # 4
print(next(iterator))  # three
print(next(iterator))  # (1, 3, 5)

# Note:
# The numbers appear ordered when iterating due to the hashing implementation
# Sets are not ordered, so do not expect this behavior
```

Python's iterators are fundamental to iteration and are used in for loops and
tuple unpacking, for example. This is useful when you want lower level control
over your iteration.

> In competitive programming however, you will find that the `itertools` library

Reviewer: wait this module should be about sorted sets, not sure why you decided to include this bit

Author: Whoops I went out of scope. I'll take it out.

Surprisingly there is not a lot of usage of `itertools` in Usaco Guide though. It saves a lot of time.

Reviewer: no yeah that’s for sure
unfortunately python is just too balls slow

</JavaSection>

<PySection>

In Python, we can use `iter()` to obtain the iterator object of any iterable.
This returns the first element, and using `next()` on the iterator gives you the
next one. Below, a dictionary is used instead of a set because dictionaries keep
order.

```py
nums = {1: None, 7: None, 0: None, 2: None, 4: None}
iterator = iter(nums)

print(iterator)  # <set_iterator object at 0x14765f3eb6c0>
print(next(iterator))  # 1
print(next(iterator))  # 7
print(next(iterator))  # 0
print(next(iterator))  # 2
print(next(iterator))  # 4
```

<Warning>
As of Python 3.6, dictionaries are ordered by **insertion order**. You can also use an `OrderedDict` from `collections`, which is built with the goal of being ordered and thus has more features and slightly different speeds compared to a regular Python dictionary.

> </Warning>

Reviewer: same here

nums = {0: None, 1: None, 2: None, 4: None, 7: None}
iterator = iter(nums)

> print(next(iterator))  # 0

Reviewer: lmao bro how do you manage to revert these every time

Author: I keep forgetting to update it in the editor lol

</JavaSection>

<PySection>

Python does not have a sorted set, however, you can represent a similar data
structure using a lazy implementation with lists, sets, and binary search. A
more accurate representation of a sorted set in Python is more complex and not
silver difficulty (usually involves creating a tree-based data structure).

In the lazy implementation, removing and inserting take $\mathcal{O}(N)$ time
since a list is used, while checking if an element is present takes

> $\mathcal{O}(1)$ time.

Reviewer: ain't gon lie this lowk defeats the whole purpose of a sorted set 😭

Author: Should I put in an actual sorted set implementation in Python?

In the meantime ill try to find a silver implementation.

Reviewer: idk usually when you need a sorted set in python it's just "cry about it and use c++"

Author: Ideas
- Show how to create a sorted set in Python (AVL Tree?) (although I would rather not want to code that since I'm not too familiar with making SBBTs) (another option is to link a resource, I found this one to be very detailed and well-made https://nibmehub.com/opac-service/pdf/read/Data%20Structures%20and%20Algorithms%20in%20Python.pdf#page=503)
- The thing about the above is that implementing a sorted set from scratch in a competitive programming context is needlessly time-consuming and probably not helpful.
- Or just state that there is no straightforward, built-in implementation in Python, and to C++ or Java for that instead lol.

Any thoughts?

Reviewer: i'm a proponent of 3, though some rare ojs like leetcode do have [sortedcontainers](https://pypi.org/project/sortedcontainers/) build in, which may or may not be worth mentioning

Reviewer 2: i agree with three as well, although it might be useful to link the resource from (1). if you do, you should make it clear that they should read it only if they're curious and that it's not required for silver.

Author: Alright, all those sound good. I didn't know Leetcode has sorted containers built in (maybe because it evens the playing field).

it reccomended to do so for a representation of a sorted set, since other
languages have sorted sets built in.

</Warning>

Since some online judges include additional libraries, an implementation of
sorted sets from the `sortedcontainers` library is shown below. All operations
shown below are $\mathcal{O}(\log N)$ time, except for its
$\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$ initialization.

```py
from sortedcontainers import SortedSet

sorted_set = SortedSet([5, 1, 3, 2])
print(sorted_set)  # SortedSet([1, 2, 3, 4, 7])

# Add elements
sorted_set.add(4)
sorted_set.add(6)
print(sorted_set)  # SortedSet([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6])

# Remove elements
sorted_set.discard(3)
sorted_set.discard(5)
print(sorted_set)  # SortedSet([1, 2, 4, 6])

# Check if an element is in the sorted set
print(2 in sorted_set)  # True
print(100 in sorted_set)  # False

# Access elements by it's index
print(sorted_set[0])  # 1 (smallest element, first index)
print(sorted_set[-1])  # 6 (largest element, last index)
print(sorted_set[2])  # 4

# Get the index of an element
print(sorted_set.index(4))  # 2

# Find the index to insert the given value
print(sorted_set.bisect_left(2))  # 1
print(sorted_set.bisect_right(2))  # 2
```

> <Warning>
> 
> Most online judges (including USACO) do not provide the `sortedcontainers`
> library as it is not from Python's standard library.
> 
> </Warning>
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
alr mentioned

Reviewer: not addressed?

Author: Do you mean it's already addressed here? `Since some online judges include additional libraries, an implementation ...` I meant it more as to why a sorted set implementation from `sortedcontainers` is shown, and the warning suits as more of a warning.

But regarding this, I also removed the warning under sorted maps, since that was already mentioned.

Reviewer: i mean you should probably include that in the initial description
"there is a 3rd party `sortecontainers` library that some ojs have"

Author: I've added a note/warning in the initial description that just specifies that additional libraries such as `sortedcontainers` is not supported by USACO, etc.

```mdx
Since some online judges include additional libraries, an implementation of
sorted sets from the `sortedcontainers` library (which is not included in most
online judges like USACO) is shown below. All operations shown below are
$\mathcal{O}(\log N)$ time, except for its $\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$
initialization.
```

```

</JavaSection>
<PySection>

Python does not have a sorted set, so see the C++ or Java if you want an
implementation from the standard library.

Creating a sorted set from scratch is time consuming, and not reccomended to do
so in contests, but if you are curious regarding the implementation, you can
find an AVL tree implementation of a sorted set below.

<Resources>
	<Resource source="DSA Python" url="https://nibmehub.com/opac-service/pdf/read/Data%20Structures%20and%20Algorithms%20in%20Python.pdf#page=503" title="AVL Trees">
		definition and implementation of AVL Trees in Python
	</Resource>
</Resources>

<Warning>

You are not expected to know how to create an AVL tree in USACO.

</Warning>

Since some online judges such as LeetCode include additional libraries, there is
also an implementation of sorted sets included from the `sortedcontainers`
library. All operations shown below are $\mathcal{O}(\log N)$ time, except for

> its $\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$ initialization.

Reviewer: you already use sortedset before mentioning this
perhaps just remove the sortedset codesnip above

```

</JavaSection>
<PySection>

Python does not have built-in sorted maps or sorted sets in its standard
library. However, with the library `sortedcontainers`, sorted maps in Python can be created by adding a dictionary to
a sorted set, where each element in the sorted set is a key in the dictionary
and values can be assigned to the dictionary.

This is the most straightforward implementation, and the ground up
implementation of a sorted set can be found in the above section.

Since some online judges include additional libraries, an implementation of
`SortedDict` from the `sortedcontainers` library can be found below. All
operations shown below are $\mathcal{O}(\log N)$ time, except for an
$\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$ initialization and $\mathcal{O}(N)$ time to get all

> items, keys, or values.

Reviewer: ngl this seems kinda a repeat of the last sortedset blurb

Author: True, there's some redundancy because I wanted people who might've only read one section (because they already know/don't want to know previous sections) to not be left out of any information. I'll remove the redundancy and assume they have read all previous sections.

Author: I also removed
```mdx
Since some online judges include additional libraries, an implementation of
`SortedDict` from the `sortedcontainers` library can be found below.
```
as they are already told about it in the above section, and there is also a warning just in case.

Reviewer: yee

implementation of a sorted set can be found in the above section.

Since some online judges include additional libraries, an implementation of
`SortedDict` from the `sortedcontainers` library can be found below. All
operations shown below are $\mathcal{O}(\log N)$ time, except for its
$\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$ initialization and getting all items, keys, or values
which is $\mathcal{O}(N)$ time.

```py
from sortedcontainers import SortedDict

sorted_map = SortedDict({1: "one", 4: "four", 3: "three"})
print(sorted_map)  # SortedDict({1: 'one', 3: 'three', 4: 'four'})

# Add elements
sorted_map[2] = "two"
sorted_map[5] = "five"
print(sorted_map)  # SortedDict({1: 'one', 2: 'two', 3: 'three', 4: 'four', 5: 'five'})

# Remove elements
del sorted_map[3]
print(sorted_map)  # SortedDict({1: 'one', 2: 'two', 4: 'four', 5: 'five'})

# Check if a key is in the sorted dict
print(1 in sorted_map)  # True
print(100 in sorted_map)  # False

# Get the key's value
print(sorted_map[2])  # two
print(sorted_map[4])  # four

# Get all items (key value pairs), keys, or values
print(
	sorted_map.items()
)  # SortedItemsView(SortedDict({1: 'one', 2: 'two', 4: 'four', 5: 'five'}))
print(
	sorted_map.keys()

> )  # SortedKeysView(SortedDict({1: 'one', 2: 'two', 4: 'four', 5: 'five'}))

Reviewer: perhaps put the comment on top of the line of code so we don't get this wonky formatting

Author: Changed to the below format:

```py
# Get all items (key value pairs), keys, or values below

# Output SortedItemsView(SortedDict({1: 'one', 2: 'two', 4: 'four', 5: 'five'}))
print(sorted_map.items())

# Output SortedKeysView(SortedDict({1: 'one', 2: 'two', 4: 'four', 5: 'five'}))
print(sorted_map.keys())

# Output SortedValuesView(SortedDict({1: 'one', 2: 'two', 4: 'four', 5: 'five'}))
print(sorted_map.values())
```

```

</JavaSection>
<PySection>

> 
> Python does not have built in sorted maps or sorted sets in it's standard
> library. However, sorted maps in Python can be created by adding a dictionary to
> a sorted set, where each element in the sorted set is a key in the dictionary
> and values can be assigned with the dictionary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Python does not have built-in sorted maps or sorted sets in its standard
library. However, with the library `sortedcontainers`, sorted maps in Python can be created by adding a dictionary to
a sorted set, where each element in the sorted set is a key in the dictionary
and values can be assigned to the dictionary.
```
